---
layout:     post
title:      Setting a custom homepage
date:       2021-02-17 23:39:00
summary:    How I changed my Jekyll homepage while keeping pagination intact
categories: jekyll
---
By default in many Jekyll themes (including the one I [use](https://github.com/johno/pixyll)) the homepage is where your blog posts are. I like having the homepage and the blog separate. My [homepage](https://www.bgigurtsis.com/) informs users about the website's function and provides links to different parts, including the blog.

Because Jekyll sets everything up for you, setting a custom homepage is not that easy, nor could I find it in the Jekyll documentation. After some experimentation and research this is the process that I used:

By default, the index.html in the root directory contains code for pagination. pagination makes it so that after a certain number of posts the rest get moved onto the next page. We need this code for our blog posts. The first step in making a new homepage is to move this pagination code into its folder. I moved `./index.html` -> `./blog/index.html`. Why I did this will become clear later.

I just moved my index page into a different folder, however, Jekyll needs an index page to build without failing. With Jekyll, the index page can be either Markdown or HTML. I wanted a stripped-down blog post as a homepage so I changed the name of the post I wanted to use to  `index.md`.

This presents further challenges as each post uses a post `layout` which dictates things to include my default. For blog posts this include how long it takes to read that post and the date. To remove this, I created a new layout inside `./_layouts` and removed the date and time to read. The layout can be found [here](https://github.com/bgigurtsis/blog/blob/master/_layouts/welcome.html).

The folder structure for my website looks like this now:

```
website
├── _config.yml
├── index.md (welcome post)
├── blog
       ├── index.html (paginate code)
│
├── _posts
       ├── post1.md
       ├── post2.md
       ├── post3.md
       ├── post4.md
       ├── post5.md
```

I then need to tell the Jekyll pagination plugin where to look for my index.html containing pagination code (./blog/index.html). This is done through my _config.yml, adding this line of code:

```
paginate_path: "/blog/page:num"
```
This not only tells pagination to look in /blog/ for index.html but also provides the format of bgigurtsis.com/blog/page2, page3, page4 etc.

So, pagination now has its path set to bgigurtsis.com/blog/page. However,  it will still go back to bgigurtsis.com when clicking `Newer` to navigate back to the first page of blog posts. To correct this I had to change this line of code:
```
     <a class="pagination-item" href="{{ "/" | relative_url }}">{{ site.text.pagination.newer | default: "Newer" }}</a>#
```
to this
```
     <a class="pagination-item" href="{{ "/blog" | relative_url }}">{{ site.text.pagination.newer | default: "Newer" }}</a>
```

And that's it! It was quite involved getting this changed when there's not much documentation on it but it was very satisfying making it work in the end.
